ifestyle-based Therapy
Our core philosophy is simple: the human body has an amazing ability to maintain its own health when provided
with the right amounts and types of healthy signals. When harmful signals are removed and appropriate signals are
enhanced, cells and organ systems are capable of creating a healthy outcome. Lifestyle-based therapy (i.e., Lifestyle
Medicine) provides the tools and incentives to help individuals assess and prioritize the signals in their own lives
that require changing, and offers a bridge of support through the journey to a healthier outcome.
For the clinician, implementing lifestyle medicine means understanding chronic disease prevention and
intervention from a different perspective, one that fully integrates the relationship between lifestyle inputs (“signals”)
and the patient’s ability to convert these signals into healthy outcomes. As Hippocrates understood it nearly 2,400
years ago, “Everyone has a physician inside him or her, we just have to help it in its work. The natural healing force within
each one of us is the greatest force in getting well.” Voltaire put this more bluntly in the 18th century when he said, “The
art of medicine consists of amusing the patient while nature cures the disease.”
Lifestyle-based therapy mandates a patient-centered philosophy; it requires assessing all the signals that
influence the health of each individual (unlike clinical trials that view patients in cohorts) and recognizes that each
individual has a different capacity to translate signals and change behaviors. Clinical success is dependent, in this
model, on an ongoing relationship between an engaged clinician and an empowered patient.
Physiological Resilience
While the name we give to chronic diseases might
depend on the organ system or tissues involved, such as
atherosclerosis, osteoarthritis, Alzheimer’s disease, type
2 diabetes or cancer; the chronic dysfunction involved
in each of these conditions is ultimately caused by the
presence of harmful signals that overwhelm tissues’
ability to self-heal, or the absence of healthy signals that
promote tissue recovery. The Lifestyle Synergy Model
we promote is designed to protect all tissues and organs
from the effects of chronic disease and is described by
two layers of resistance against poor lifestyle signals:
physiological resilience and metabolic reserve.
Physiological resilience is the capacity of
each cell or organ system to withstand the necessary
(and immediate) changes that create the rhythm of a
healthy organism. The ability of arteries to dilate when
blood flow increases, the ability to quickly dispose of
excess glucose after a meal, or the ability to increase
and decrease cortisol when a stressful situation arises
and resolves are just a few examples of physiological
resilience. Each of these systems, and thousands more,
are like coiled springs or rubber bands capable of being
stretched for a particular physiological purpose, then
designed to snap back to their original status, ready
for the next physiological challenge. Some systems are
stretched and snap back in an instant, such as nerve
conductivity, others in hours, like blood-glucose control.
Some follow a circadian cycle, such as the HPA axis,
and others a monthly cycle, menstruation for example.
When inappropriate or overwhelming signals
begin to overpower our physiological resilience, the
stretching of that system does not immediately resolve.
Perhaps the best example of this is the slow progression
of impaired glucose tolerance/insulin resistance, which
is sometimes referred to as the “metabolic continuum.”
Note in Figure 1 the “stretching” of the post-prandial
glucose affects the area under the curve (AUC) of
glucose much more than the change in the eventual
fasting state. By the time a patient is deemed to be a
“type 2 diabetic,” their ability to reach normal fasting
